---
title: "A Comprehensive Survey on Graph Anomaly Detection with Deep Learning"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2021-10-01-paper-title-number-3
excerpt: 'Authors: Xiaoxiao Ma, Jia Wu, Shan Xue, Jian Yang, Chuan Zhou, Quan Z. Sheng, Hui Xiong, Leman Akoglu'
date: 2021-10-01
venue: 'IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering'
paperurl: 'https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9565320'
citation: ' '
---

Anomalies are rare observations (e.g., data records or events) that deviate significantly from the others in the sample. Over the past few decades, research on anomaly mining has received increasing interests due to the implications of these occurrences in a wide range of disciplines - for instance, security, finance, and medicine. For this reason, anomaly detection, which aims to identify these rare observations, has become one of the most vital tasks in the world and has shown its power in preventing detrimental events, such as financial fraud, network intrusions, and social spam. The detection task is typically solved by identifying outlying data points in the feature space, which, inherently, overlooks the relational information in real-world data. At the same time, graphs have been prevalently used to represent the structural/relational information, which raises the graph anomaly detection problem - identifying anomalous graph objects (i.e., nodes, edges and sub-graphs) in a single graph, or anomalous graphs in a set/database of graphs. Conventional anomaly detection techniques cannot tackle this problem well because of the complexity of graph data (e.g., irregular structures, relational dependencies, node/edge types/attributes/directions/multiplicities/weights, large scale, etc.). However, thanks to the advent of deep learning in breaking these limitations, graph anomaly detection with deep learning has received a growing attention recently. In this survey, we aim to provide a systematic and comprehensive review of the contemporary deep learning techniques for graph anomaly detection. Specifically, we provide a taxonomy that follows a task-driven strategy and categorizes existing work according to the anomalous graph objects that they can detect. We especially focus on the challenges in this research area and discuss the key intuitions, technical details as well as relative strengths and weaknesses of various techniques in each category. From the survey results, we highlight 12 future research directions spanning unsolved and emerging problems introduced by graph data, anomaly detection, deep learning and real-world applications. Additionally, to provide a wealth of useful resources for future studies, we have compiled a set of open-source implementations, public datasets, and commonly-used evaluation metrics. With this survey, our goal is to create a “one-stop-shop” that provides a unified understanding of the problem categories and existing approaches, publicly available hands-on resources, and high-impact open challenges for graph anomaly detection using deep learning.